
# Data publication, access, and citation: The EarthChem Library
Data publication, open access, and citation are the foci of the EarthChem Library (ECL). The ECL holds digital resources submitted by investigators, accompanied by a brief profile of informative and searchable documentation based on the DataCite standard \citep{Starr_2011}. Investigators submit their digital file, which becomes publically available and assigned a DOI (Digital Object Identifier). The ECL is committed to open access and long-term availability of datasets that might otherwise be behind a pay-wall, or inaccessible on a personal hard drive. Further, the ECL accepts all types of data, including images and software packages, and does not limit submissions to rock geochemistry. This feature allows the ECL to be open to a wide range of interdisciplinary scientists.

The ECL houses several compilations such as a mid-ocean ridge basalt compilation \citep{Class2012}, the VentDB hydrothermal vent chemistry compilation \citep{Mottl2012}, and the results of the geochemical IEDA Data Rescue Mini-Awards, which are compilations of career-spanning datasets. These include datasets from the Fiji, Izu, and Endeavour segment arcs \citep{Gill2014} and Lunar geochemistry on samples from the Apollo missions \citep{Delano2013a, Delano2013b}. Other types of resources include software like the Arc Basalt Simulator, an Excel macro that calculates chemical compositions of arc-derived basalts \citep{Kimura2012}. EarthChem dataset DOIs can be used to provide bi-directional linking from articles to supporting datasets, including those that will not fit in supplemental material size or format requirements.  

To facilitate submission to the ECL, IEDA supports scientists by providing suggested templates for common analytical techniques (e.g., major, trace, and isotope analysis) that guide the investigator towards the necessary information needed for data preservation within the ECL. The submitted files are reviewed for ECL standards by an IEDA geoscientist. This subject knowledge is an advantage of disciplinary data repositories and promotes trust from the community that published data are of high quality \citep{Lehnert2013}. The ECL is an efficient way to make datasets publicly available and meet data release requirements from funding agencies. Whether linked to formal written publications or not, the reliable retrieval and improved citability of ECL data resources is important for the scientific community. 
